---
title:  "The Problem With Economics"
header:
  overlay_color: "#000"
  overlay_filter: "0.0"
  overlay_image: Panoramic.png
excerpt: "A discussion on the organic, emergent and complex system that is an Economy. Considering economics in this light provides clear insight into how to approach macroeconomic research"
modified: 2020-11-04T16:03:49-04:00
---
## The Problem With Economics:

The lack of consensus within economics on many fundamental issues often causes me to wonder whether the discipline has made any meaningful progress since Keynes penned his famous book ‘The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money’ in 1936. Arguably the most famous economic text ever written, it’s telling that modern economists are still split over some of the book’s core assertations. 

Of course, there are good reasons why economists have failed to all converge on some enlightened understanding, the most obvious being that economics is a science without adequate scientific instruments, a discipline lacking in discipline and at its heart, a failure to understand the organic, emergent complex system that is an economy. 

The sheer scale and interconnected nature of everything and everyone in the world makes it a mind bogglingly complex system, far beyond the reach of any supercomputer simulation that we can do now. As a system, the economy finds it’s best parable in the shape of weather forecasting. Like the economy, weather has thousands of interacting elements, and the slightest change to just one of them has been shown to make huge differences in predicted outcome (at least over short-term forecasts). This is how chaos theory arose, through the discovery in the early 1960s that rounding meteorological inputs to three decimal places rather than six caused a completely different weather forecast.

Of course weather forecasts have improved since the 1960s, driven by far more complex and realistic atmospheric simulations and the advent of computing. But at the heart of every weather forecast is a simulation which is itself just a simplified set of laws and assumptions about the atmosphere. Chaos theory describes the limitation of simulations in complex systems, and with weather forecasting we see the cumulative effect of small errors in prediction resulting in the complete breakdown of accurate weather forecast beyond one to two weeks from the current date. 

Economics is arguably a complex system more difficult to model than the weather. After all, water and carbon dioxide molecules behave in a predictable manner, i.e. a water molecule should do the same thing when exposed to the same circumstances repeatedly. People on the other hand do not behave like this, culture and upbring complicates the situation, along with the ability to remember past outcomes and therefore to constantly update their behaviour. 

Measurements are much harder too. It’s reasonably straight forward to use weather balloons laden with scientific instruments to record the moisture content and temperature at different heights of the atmosphere in different locations. But macroeconomic data is no where near as detailed or reliable and this is something the discipline will likely just have to work around.

But despite the added difficulties of human behaviour and unreliable data, economic research can't take an overly simplified approach of searching for clear cause and effect relationships in small segments of the economy. As an example consider GDP, in the absence of a compelling complex model, GDP is often assumed to simply grow at a fixed percentage amount each year. But such a simplistic and reductionist assumption misses many key relationships, for instance rising wages in a country like China may cause factories to relocate to countries with cheaper labour, but an increase in Chinese wages may increase demand within China's domestic market. China's exceptional cutting-edge technology may allow it to hold onto or even increase its dominant position in world manufacturing - which may slow the development of other countries looking to grow via international trade, or Chinese manufacturing might be hampered by its lack of natural resources and issues relating to debt and the banking sector. 

I could go on with more interconnected relationships between GDP and the economy, but the key point is that we have absolutely no idea which of the hundreds of factors will determine China’s future GDP. It is very probable that GDP growth will depend on a 'critical mass' of a number of these factors. For instance continued GDP growth may need a minimum level of education, wages, technology adoption, natural resources or some other factor. Only when all these factors are to a sufficient level will an economy suddenly experience a period of prolonged GDP growth. The interconnected dependencies of this example are a prime opportunity for the use of AI.
 
Recognising the complexity of the challenge presented by economics allows us to see that the approach taken to understanding it needs to replicate that taken by meteorology, with likely even more innovation and collaboration required to begin to build and create theories that are predictive and useful in the real world. 
But this has not been the approach taken by macroeconomists. Macroeconomic research generally focuses on one specific area of the economy, attempting to first find a clear correlation between historical variables and then to use this correlation to make some future prediction. But as I have just outlined, an economy is a highly complex system that needs to be modelled as a whole if we are to understand the effects of any one area. 

So why has economic research focused so much on small specific segments of the economy rather than examining and testing the whole system? I think this is likely a symptom of how research is structured, with economists mostly working individually and a lack of interdisciplinary research. Very few people have all the required skills (economic knowledge, software development, AI) needed to study macroeconomics in a meaningful way. I believe meaningful progress in economics can only be achieved with such an interdisciplinary approach, but as this is not the normal structure of academia, researchers are forced to adopt an approach of lone working that is destined to fail from the start. 
